We're driving through a river right now
in the Jeep.
For thousands of years,
humans have drawn lines on the Earth,
dividing the planet into nations, but
there are some parts of the world that
no empire, nation, or state has been able to tame.
Just the geography here is
completely unruly.
Land that is so high,
so rugged, that states have found it
impossible to exert control.
We're about to hit 4,000 meters, feeling the effects.
These are called non-state spaces.
Definitely feels like humans were never
meant to be here
And the people who
settle in these places sought refuge
from borders.
But even here, among the highest
mountains in the world,
this stateless lifestyle is coming to an
end.
Non-state spaces have always existed,
all over the globe. They're usually high
up in mountains, far from the reach of
any government and the people who live
here didn't come here by chance. Most of
them are communities who fled into the
mountains to evade expanding government
forces, some communities were escaping
capture like those in Africa fleeing
from the Arab and Atlantic slave trades.
Other groups retreated to remote
regions to escape ruling powers who they
opposed, from the Inuit and the Arctic,
to the Berbers in North Africa, to the
Jivaroan in the Amazon rainforest.
Examples exist all over the globe of
people who chose rugged terrain over
taxes, war, famine, and subjugation from
state powers. Today, there are some 5,000
indigenous groups living in 90 countries,
numbering in total around 370 million
people worldwide. 70% of those are in
Asia. Most of these groups have
integrated into countries, but for those
who reside deep in the mountains,
geography has largely held off the
influence of any kind of centralized
government.
So I came up here to visit
one community that fled to the mountains
1,200 years ago. Back then the Tibetan
Empire, which was just north of here was
pursuing its own state-making project,
its own empire, and it was growing. As the
Tibetan Empire grew, its borders
eventually encompassed the Bon religion.
This was a religious group that predates
Buddhism. The Bon fought to preserve its
culture within the Tibetan Empire. They
resisted the Empire, but eventually
failed and instead of assimilated to
this new Empire, they fled and they came
here to these mountains, where they
created a life away from the militaries,
the taxes, the religion, and the control
of the Tibetan Empire and that life
continues today.
Eventually this whole area would be
drawn into a modern state, the state of
Nepal. And Tibet, where these people came
from, would become China. But these people
don't identify as Chinese, or necessarily
Nepali. People here, they wanted the kids
to learn to Tibetan, like as their
language, because we are more related
with the Tibetan culture.
The 25 families that live here
have their own distinct identity.
They speak their own dialect of
Tibetan. They mainly live off the land,
farming and raising animals to survive.
The Himalayan mountain range is
particularly rich with these examples of
non-state spaces. So many examples in
fact, that a group of anthropologists
argue that this place should actually be
its own region. They use the term  Zomia
to describe this long range of mountains
where people have set up for thousands
of years without the help of governments
of states.
The borders of this Zomia
concept encompass a hundred million
people. It runs through eight countries,
but is on the periphery of each. The
diverse set of peoples living here have
a varying degree of interaction with
their country governments. I came to this
region, one of the most remote zones
within Zomia, but even here you can feel
that Zomia's stateless days are
numbered.
Everywhere you go up here, you see herds
of animals, shepherds guiding them
through the mountains. After leaving this
Bon village I moved north and came
across a different community, where this
family's lifestyle is based almost
entirely on the movement of their
animals. We're at 4,200 meters, Tibet is
just right over this hill.
And I'm hanging out with some yak today.
This family's actually nomadic, they're constantly
moving around throughout the year, so
they'll be in this pasture for a little
bit while the yak will graze here and
eat this grass, and then they'll move on
to another place. Meanwhile the grasses
here will have time to regenerate, the
dung from these yak right now will help
fertilize the land, and they'll
eventually come back here, maybe next
year, and they will find a pasture full
of really wonderful grass that's full of
nutrients that their yak can graze again.
And there's no external inputs to this,
there's no fertilizer or irrigation infrastructure.
And this whole process and
technique hinges on their ability to be
able to move freely throughout this
region, which hasn't been a problem for
hundreds of years as this place has been
basically rid of any sort of borders or
control. But that's changing very quickly.
This is where the Tibetan language is
spoken. The many communities in these
mountains have always considered
themselves Tibetan, moving freely into
Tibet for trade and religious practices,
but in 1950 China controversially
annexed Tibet. They eventually negotiated
this border line with Nepal. Notice that
it goes right through what these people
think of as Tibet. The yak grazers I met
are mostly based down here on the Nepal
side, and luckily for them this border
only existed in theory. The yak grazers
continue to graze their animals deep
into Tibet, as they had for hundreds of years, but over the
years China started getting rich, which
came with a renewed desire to project
its influence and protect its borders,
especially in Tibet where people were
fleeing to get away from Chinese rule.
China now had the money, technology,
geopolitical motive to start taming this
region. They started crushing protests
from Tibetans and setting up military
infrastructure on the Tibetan Plateau
and in 1999 they built this fence on the
border, marking the end of the unfettered
mobility that these people had depended
on for centuries in this non-state space.
This place that had been too high for
borders, suddenly had to adapt to the
first concept of boundaries and control
coming from far away governments.
I wanted to go see this fence. At over 15,000 feet above sea
level, it has to be one of the highest
borders on Earth.
So I'm on the windy
Tibetan Plateau, looking at the border
but we're half a kilometer away and
something really weird has happened. My
driver who's Nepali stopped and said we
can't go any further. I was like well
we're on Nepali sovereign territory, why
would why couldn't we just go up to the
fence? You'd be able to do this at every
other country I've ever been to. He said
no, the Chinese will come over and they'll
snatch us. Now we're still very much on
the Nepali, side but the Chinese come in
here routinely to ask questions, to even
detain people randomly. They have
surveillance, they have watch towers
even on the Nepali side. China now has
the technology and political motive to
exert control in this remote and rugged
region, to militarize its border here.
This isn't the only effort by a faraway
government to tame this region. The
governments of Nepal, India, and China are
also building the first roads here.
It's a lofty goal.
So we've got a landslide
on the road, which means we can
go no further in the Jeep. And we're
gonna have to hike. The thinking here is
that a road system could serve as a
trade artery through the Himalaya Mountains,
eventually. We're stuck again,
this time on a waterfall with a 200-foot
cliff by the side of it. And so yes, while
these state forces are slowly
encroaching on this terrain, it's going
to be long work and it's not going to be
easy. They're slowly chipping away, but
man this place just was never meant to
be tamed.
Nepal is sandwiched between
the two largest countries on Earth,
divided by these massive Himalaya Mountains.
A road would create an
enormous trade opportunity between these countries.
So there's been a blitz of construction
projects aimed at creating a viable road
through this mountain pass. The Indian
government is funding projects like this
bridge, and locals told me that the
Chinese government routinely sends
building materials to help construction.
The road still has a long way to go
before it can sustain large flows of
goods, but even now the road is reshaping
the relationship that these communities
have with the outside world, shifting
their economy from bartering to cash-based
markets where residents can create
businesses around cheap goods from China.
And as always with change, there are
winners and losers.
Everything here is made of yak.
This tent, which is made entirely
of yak wool.
Yak cheese,
Tea with yak butter in it.
Drinking yak milk, which is extremely delicious.
These people who are used to bartering
and are used to living off of the
products of their animals, are having a
hard time integrating, having a hard time
finding a space in this new economy that
is based on cash, is based on big
international flows of goods.
That Bon community whose customs had
been so well preserved in these
mountains, have also felt the effects of
this road.
People are leaving. Children
especially. Parents want to educate their
kids and they are sending them to India
or to Kathmandu to get educated. A lot of
these kids will go their entire
childhood without actually being in this community.
You have to remember these people set up in the mountains
specifically to preserve their tradition
and culture, and so to see it disappear
overnight
due to these modernizing forces, is
giving people a lot of anxiety. The way
they've solved this is that they're
building this school, that is based on
educating children in the Bon tradition
and the language of this community.
But despite the disruptive effects of the
road, most people I talk to are still
happy it's here.
For centuries people have escaped
modern civilization by fleeing to the
mountains, but now generations later, for
some these mountains can feel more like
a trap than a refuge.